=== PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:2505.24784v1  [cs.AI]  30 May 2025
AXIOM: Learning to Play Games in Minutes with
Expanding Object-Centric Models
Conor Heins1∗
Toon Van de Maele1∗
Alexander Tschantz1,2∗
Hampus Linander1
Dimitrije Markovic3
Tommaso Salvatori1
Corrado Pezzato1
Ozan Catal1
Ran Wei1
Magnus Koudahl1
Marco Perin1
Karl Friston1,4
Tim Verbelen1
Christopher L Buckley1,2
1 VERSES AI
2 University of Sussex, Department of Informatics
3 Technische Universität Dresden, Faculty of Psychology
4 University College London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology
{conor.heins,toon.vandemaele,alec.tschantz}@verses.ai
Abstract
Current deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approaches achieve state-of-the-art
performance in various domains, but struggle with data efficiency compared to
human learning, which leverages core priors about objects and their interactions.
Active inference offers a principled framework for integrating sensory information
with prior knowledge to learn a world model and quantify the uncertainty of its own
beliefs and predictions. However, active inference models are usually crafted for a
single task with bespoke knowledge, so they lack the domain flexibility typical of
DRL approaches. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel architecture that integrates
a minimal yet expressive set of core priors about object-centric dynamics and inter-
actions to accelerate learning in low-data regimes. The resulting approach, which
we call AXIOM, combines the usual data efficiency and interpretability of Bayesian
approaches with the across-task generalization usually associated with DRL. AX-
IOM represents scenes as compositions of objects, whose dynamics are modeled
as piecewise linear trajectories that capture sparse object-object interactions. The
structure of the generative model is expanded online by growing and learning mix-
ture models from single events and periodically refined through Bayesian model
reduction to induce generalization. AXIOM masters various games within only
10,000 interaction steps, with both a small number of parameters compared to DRL,
and without the computational expense of gradient-based optimization.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success as a flexible framework for mastering
complex tasks. However, current methods have several drawbacks: they require large amounts of
training data, depend on large replay buffers, and focus on maximizing cumulative reward without
structured exploration [1]. This contrasts with human learning, which relies on core priors to quickly
generalize to novel tasks [2–4]. Core priors represent fundamental organizational principles - or
hyperpriors - that shape perception and learning, providing the scaffolding upon which more complex
knowledge structures are built. For example, such priors allow humans to intuitively understand that
objects follow smooth trajectories unless external forces intervene, and shape our causal reasoning,
helping us to grasp action-consequence relationships [5–8]. Describing visual scenes as factorized
into objects has shown promise in sample efficiency, generalization, and robustness on various tasks
[9–14]. These challenges are naturally addressed by Bayesian agent architectures, such as active
inference [15], that provide a principled framework for incorporating prior knowledge into models,
Preprint. Under review.


=== PAGE 2 ===
sMM
🏆
🎮
tMM
Identity
Model 
iMM
rMM
Object-Object
Interactions
Figure 1: Inference and prediction flow using AXIOM: The sMM extracts object-centric repre-
sentations from pixel inputs. For each object latent and its closest interacting counterpart, a discrete
identity token is inferred using the iMM and passed to the rMM, along with the distance and the
action, to predict the next reward and the tMM switch. The object latents are then updated using the
tMM and the predicted switch to generate the next state for all objects. (a) Projection of the object
latents into image space. (b) Projection of the kth latent whose dynamics are being predicted and (c)
of its interaction partner. (d) Projection of the rMM in image space; each of the visualized clusters
corresponds to a particular linear dynamical system from the tMM. (e) Projection of the predicted
latents. The past latents at time t are shown in gray.
supporting continual adaptation without catastrophic forgetting. It has been argued that this approach
aligns closely with human cognitive processes [16, 17], where beliefs are updated incrementally as
new evidence emerges. Yet, despite these theoretical advantages, applications of active inference
have typically been confined to small-scale tasks with carefully designed priors, failing to achieve the
versatility that makes deep RL so powerful across diverse domains.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel active inference architecture that integrates a minimal yet
expressive set of core priors about objects and their interactions [9–12, 18]. Specifically, we present
AXIOM (Active eXpanding Inference with Object-centric Models), which employs a object-centric
state space model with three key components: (1) a Gaussian mixture model that parses visual input
into object-centric representations and automatically expands to accommodate new objects; (2) a
transition mixture model that discovers motion prototypes (e.g., falling, sliding, bouncing) [19] and
(3) a sparse relational mixture model over multi-object latent features, learning causally relevant
interactions as jointly driven by object states, actions, rewards, and dynamical modes. AXIOM’s
learning algorithm offers three kinds of efficiency: first, it learns sequentially one frame at a time
with variational Bayesian updating [20]. This eliminates the need for replay buffers or gradient
computations, and enables online adaptation to changes in the data distribution. Second, its mixture
architecture facilitates fast structure learning by both adding new mixture components when existing
ones cannot explain new data, and merging redundant ones to reduce model complexity [21–24].
Finally, by maintaining posteriors over parameters, AXIOM can augment policy selection with
information-seeking objectives and thus uncertainty-aware exploration [15].
To empirically validate our model, we introduce the Gameworld 10k benchmark, a new set of
environments designed to evaluate how efficiently an agent can play different pixel-based games
in 10k interactions. Many existing RL benchmarks, such as the Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE) [25] or MuJoCo [26] domains, emphasize long-horizon credit assignment, complex physics,
or visual complexity. These factors often obscure core challenges in fast learning and generalization,
especially under structured dynamics. To this end, each of the games in Gameworld 10k follows a
similar, object-focused pattern: multiple objects populating a visual scene, a player object that can
be controlled to score points, and objects following continuous trajectories with sparse interaction
mechanics. We formulate a set of 10 games with deliberately simplified visual elements (single color
sprites of different shapes and sizes) to focus the current work on the representational mechanisms
used for modeling dynamics and control, rather than learning an overly-expressive model for object
segmentation. The Gameworld environments also enable precise control of game features and
2


=== PAGE 3 ===
Aviate
Bounce
Cross
Drive
Explode
Fruits
Gold
Hunt
Impact
Jump
Figure 2: Gameworld10k: Visual impression of the 10 games in the Gameworld 10k suite. Se-
quences of ten frames are overlayed with increasing opacity to showcase the game dynamics.
dynamics, which allows testing how systems adapt to sparse interventions to the causal or visual
structure of the game, e.g., the shape and color of game objects. On this benchmark, our agent
outperforms popular reinforcement learning models in the low-data regime (10,000 interaction
steps) without relying on any kind of gradient-based optimization. To conclude, although we have
not deployed AXIOM at the scale of complicated control tasks typical of the RL literature, our
results represent a meaningful step toward building agents capable of building compact, interpretable
world models and exploiting them for rapid decision-making across different domains. Our main
contributions are the following:
• We introduce AXIOM, a novel object-centric active inference agent that is learned online, inter-
pretable, sample efficient, adaptable and computationally cheap.1
• To demonstrate the efficacy of AXIOM, we introduce a new, modifiable benchmark suite targeting
sample-efficient learning in environments with objects and sparse interactions.
• We show that our gradient-free method can outperform state-of-the-art deep learning methods both
in terms of sample efficiency and absolute performance, with our online learning scheme showing
robustness to environmental perturbations.
2
Methods
AXIOM is formulated in the context of a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
At each time step t, the hidden state ht evolves according to ht ∼P
 ht | ht–1, at−1

, where at is
the action taken at time t. The agent does not observe ht directly but instead receives an observation
yt ∼P
 yt | ht

, and a reward rt ∼P
 rt | ht, at

. AXIOM learns an object-centric state space
model by maximizing the Bayesian model evidence—equivalently, minimizing (expected) free
energy—through active interaction with the environment [15]. The model factorizes perception and
dynamics into separate generative blocks: (i) In perception, a slot Mixture Model (sMM) explains
pixels with competition between object-centric latent variables Ot = {O(1)
t , . . . , O(K)
t
}, associating
each pixel to one of K slots using the assignment variable zt,smm; (ii) dynamics are modeled per-
object using their object-centric latent descriptions as inputs to a recurrent switching state space
model (similar to an rSLDS [19]). We define the full latent sequence as Z0:T = {Ot, zt,smm}T
t=0.
Each slot latent O(k)
t
consists of both continuous x(k)
t
and discrete latent variables. The continuous
latents represent properties of an object, such as its position, color and shape. The discrete latents
themselves are split into two subtypes: z(k)
t
and s(k)
t
. We use z(k)
t
to denote latent descriptors that
capture categorical attributes of the slot (e.g., object type), and s(k)
t
to denote a pair of switch states
determining the slot’s instantaneous trajectory.2 Model parameters ˜Θ are split into module-specific
subsets (e.g., ΘsMM, ΘtMM). The joint distribution over input sequences y0:T , latent state sequences
Z0:T and parameters ˜Θ can be expressed as a hidden Markov model:
p(y0:T , Z0:T , ˜Θ) = p(y0, Z0)p( ˜Θ)
T
Y
t=1
p(xt–1, | zt, ΘiMM)
|
{z
}
Identity mixture model
p(xt–1, zt, st, at–1, rt | ΘrMM)
|
{z
}
Recurrent mixture model
K
Y
k=1
p(yt|x(k)
t
, zt,smm, ΘsMM)
|
{z
}
Slot mixture model
p(x(k)
t
| x(k)
t−1, s(k)
t
, ΘtMM)
|
{z
}
Transition mixture model
,
(1)
1The code for training AXIOM is available at https://github.com/VersesTech/axiom
2We use the superscript index k as in q(k) to select only the subset of q ≡q(1:K) relevant to the kth slot.
3


=== PAGE 4 ===
where p( ˜Θ) = p(ΘsMM)p(ΘiMM)p(ΘrMM)p(ΘtMM). The sMM p(yt|xt, zt,smm, ΘsMM) is a likeli-
hood model that explains pixel data using mixtures of slot-specific latent states (see schematic in
Figure 1). The identity mixture model (iMM) p(xt–1|zt, ΘiMM) is a likelihood model that assigns
each object-centric latent to one of a set of discrete object types. The transition mixture model (tMM)
p(x(k)
t
|x(k)
t–1, s(k)
t
, ΘtMM) describes each object’s latent dynamics as a piecewise linear function of
its own state. Finally, the recurrent mixture model (rMM) p(xt–1, zt, st, at–1, rt | ΘrMM) models the
dependencies between multi-object latent states (like the switch states of the transition mixture), other
global game states like reward r, action a, and the continuous and discrete features of each object.
This module is what allows AXIOM to model sparse interactions between objects (e.g., collisions),
while still treating each slot’s dynamics as conditionally-independent given the switch states s(k)
t
.
Slot Mixture Model (sMM).
AXIOM processes sequences of RGB images one frame at a time. Each
image is composed of H × W pixels and is reshaped into N =HW tokens {yn
t }N
n=1. Each token
yn
t is a vector containing the nth pixel’s color in RGB and its image coordinates (normalized to

−1, +1

). AXIOM models these tokens at a given time as explained by a mixture of the continuous
slot latents; we term this likelihood construction the Slot Mixture Model (sMM, see far left side of
Figure 1). The K components of this mixture model are Gaussian distributions whose parameters
are directly given by the continuous features of each slot latent x(1:K)
t
. Associated to this Gaussian
mixture is a binary assignment variable zn
t,k,smm ∈{0, 1} indicating whether pixel n at time t is
driven by slot k, with the constraint that P
k zn
t,k,smm = 1. The sMM’s likelihood model for a single
pixel and timepoint yn
t can be expressed as follows (dropping the t subscript for notational clarity):
p(yn | x(k), σ(k)
c , zn
k,smm) =
K
Y
k=1
N(Ax(k), diag(

Bx(k), σ(k)
c
⊤))zn
k,smm.
(2)
The mean of each Gaussian component is given a fixed linear projection A of each object latent,
which selects only its position and color features: Ax(k) =

p(k), c(k)
. The covariance of each
component is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal is a projection of the 2-D shape of the object latent
Bx(k) = e(k) (its spatial extent in the X and Y directions), stacked on top of a fixed variance
for each color dimension σ(k)
c , which are given independent Gamma priors. The latent variables
p(k), c(k), e(k) are subsets of slot k’s full continuous features x(k)
t
, and the projection matrices A,
B are fixed, unlearned parameters. Each token’s slot indicator zn
smm is drawn from a Categorical
distribution zn
smm | πsmm ∼Cat(πsmm) with mixing weights πsmm. We place a truncated stick-
breaking (finite GEM) prior on these weights, which is equivalent to a K-dimensional Dirichlet
with concentration vector (1, . . . , 1, α0,smm), where the first K −1 pseudcounts are 1 and the final
pseudocount α0,smm reflects the propensity to add new slots. All subsequent mixture models in
AXIOM are equipped with the same sort of truncated stick-breaking priors on the mixing weights
[27].
Identity Mixture Model (iMM).
AXIOM uses an identity mixture model (iMM) to infer a discrete
identity code z(k)
type for each object based on its continuous features. These identity codes are used to
condition the inference of the recurrent mixture model used for dynamics prediction. Conditioning
the dynamics on identity-codes in this way, rather than learning a separate dynamics model for each
slot, allows AXIOM to use the same dynamics model across slots. This also enables the model to
learn the same dynamics in a type-specific, rather than instance-specific, manner [28], and to remap
identities when e.g., the environment is perturbed and colors change. Concretely, the iMM models
the 5-D colors and shapes {c(k), e(k)}K
k=1 across slots as a mixture of up to V Gaussian components
(object types). The slot-level assignment variable z(k)
t,type indicates which identity is assigned to the
kthslot. The generative model for the iMM is (omitting the t −1 subscript from latent variables):
p(

c(k), e(k)⊤|z(k)
type, µ1:V,type, Σ1:V,type) =
VY
j=1
N(µj,type, Σj,type)z(k)
j,type
(3)
p(µj,type, Σ−1
j,type) = NIW(mj,type, κj,type, Uj,type, nj,type)
(4)
The same type of Categorical likelihood for the type assignments z(k)
type | πtype ∼Cat(πtype) and
truncated stick-breaking prior Dir
 1, . . . , 1, α0,type

over the mixture weights is used to allow an
4


=== PAGE 5 ===
arbitrary (up to a maximum of V ) number of types to be used to explain the continuous slot features.
We equip the prior over the component likelihood parameters with conjugate Normal Inverse Wishart
(NIW) priors.
Transition Mixture Model (tMM).
The dynamics of each slot are modelled as a mixture of linear
functions of the slot’s own previous state. To stress the homology between this model and the
other modules of AXIOM, we refer to this module as the transition mixture model or tMM, but this
formulation is more commonly also known as a switching linear dynamical system or SLDS [29].
The tMM’s switch variable s(k)
t,tmm selects a set of linear parameters Dl, bl to describe the kth slot’s
trajectory from t to t + 1. Each linear system captures a distinct rigid motion pattern for a particular
object (e.g., “ball in free flight”, “paddle moving left”).
p(x(k)
t
| x(k)
t–1, s(k)
t,tmm, D1:L, b1:L) =
L
Y
l=1
N(Dlx(k)
t
+ bl, 2I)s(k)
t,l,tmm
(5)
where we fix the covariance of all L components to be 2I, and all mixture likelihoods D1:L, b1:L to
have uniform priors. The mixing weights πtmm for s(k)
t,tmm as before are given a truncated stick-breaking
prior Dir
 1, . . . , 1, α0,tmm) enabling the number of linear modes L to be dynamically adjusted to the
data by growing the model with propensity α0,tmm. Importantly, the L transition components of the
tMM are not slot-dependent, but are shared and thus learned across all K slot latents. The tMM can
thus explain and predict the motion of different objects using a shared, expanding set of dynamical
motifs. As we will see in the next section, interactions between objects are modelled by conditioning
s(k)
t,tmm on the states of other objects.
Recurrent Mixture Model (rMM).
AXIOM employs a recurrent mixture model (rMM) to infer the
switch states of the transition model directly from current slot-level features. This dependence of
switch states on continuous features is the same construct used in the recurrent switching linear
dynamical system or rSLDS [19]. However, like the rSLDS, which uses a discriminative mapping to
infer the switch state from the continuous state, rMM recovers this dependence generatively using
a mixture model over mixed continuous–discrete slot states [30]. Concretely, the rMM models the
distribution of continuous and discrete variables as a mixture model driven by another per-slot latent
assignment variable s(k)
rmm. The rMM’s defines a mixture likelihood over continuous and discrete
slot-specific information: (f (k)
t–1 , d(k)
t–1). The continuous slot features f (k)
t–1 are a function of of both the
kth slot’s own continuous state state x(k)
t–1 as well as the states of other slots x(1:K)
t–1
, such as the distance
to the closest object. The discrete features include categorical slot features like the identity of the
closest object, the switch state associated with the transition mixture model, and the action and reward
at the current timestep: d(k)
t–1 = (z(k)
t–1, s(k)
t–1,tmm, at–1, rt). The rMM assignment variable associated to
a given slot is a binary vector s(k)
t,rmm whose mth entry s(k)
t,m,rmm ∈{0, 1} indicates whether component
m explains the current tuple of mixed continuous-discrete data. Each component likelihood selected
by s(k)
t,rmm factorizes into a product of continuous (Gaussian) and discrete (Categorical) likelihoods.
f (k)
t–1 =

Cx(k)
t–1, g(x(1:K)
t–1
)

,
d(k)
t–1 =

z(k)
t–1, s(k)
t,tmm, at–1, rt

(6)
p(f (k)
t–1, d(k)
t–1 | s(k)
t,rmm) =
M
Y
m=1

N
 f (k)
t–1; µm,rmm, Σm,rmm
 Y
i
Cat
 dt–1, i; αm,i



st,m,rmm
(7)
where the matrix C is a projection matrix that selects a subset of slot k’s continuous features are
used, and g(x(1:K)
t–1
) summarizes functions that compute slot-to-slot interaction features, such as the
X and Y -displacement to the nearest object, the identity code associated with the nearest object
(and other features detailed in Appendix A). As with all the other modules of AXIOM, we equip
the mixing weights for s(k)
t,rmm with a truncated stick-breaking prior whose final M th pseudocount
parameter tunes the propensity to add new rMM components. We explored an ablation of the rMM
(fixed_distance) where the X and Y -displacement vector is not returned by g(x(1:K)
t−1 ); rather, the
distance that triggers detection of the nearest interacting object is a fixed hyperparameter of the g
function. This hyperparameter can to be tuned to attain higher reward on most environments than the
5


=== PAGE 6 ===
standard model where the rMM learns the distance online. However, it comes at the cost of having to
tune this hyperparamter in an environment-specific fashion (see Figure 3 and Table 1 for the effect of
the fixed_distance ablation on performance).
Variational inference.
AXIOM uses variational inference to perform state inference and parameter
learning. Briefly, this requires updating an approximate posterior distribution q(Z0:T , ˜Θ) over latent
variables and parameters to minimize the variational free energy F, an upper bound on negative
log evidence F ≥−log p(y0:T ). In doing so, the variational posterior approximates the true
posterior p(Z0:T , ˜Θ | y0:T ) from exact but intractable Bayesian inference . We enforce independence
assumptions in the variational posterior over several factors: across states and parameters, across the
K slot latents, and over time T. This is known as the mean-field approximation:
q(Z0:T , ˜Θ) = q( ˜Θ)
T
Y
t=0


N
Y
n=1
q(zn
t,sMM)




K
Y
k=1
q(O(k)
t
)


(8)
q(O(k)
t
) = q(x(k)
t
)q(z(k)
t
)q(s(k)
t
),
q( ˜Θ) = q(ΘsMM)q(ΘiMM)q(ΘtMM)q(ΘrMM)
(9)
Note that the mixture variable of the sMM zt,smm is factored out of the other object-centric latents in
both the generative model and the posterior because unlike the other discrete latents z(k)
t
, it is not
independent across K slots.
We update the posterior over latent states q(Z0:T ) (i.e., the variational E-step) using a simple form of
forward-only filtering and update parameters using coordinate ascent variational inference, using the
sufficient statistics of the latents updated during filtering and the data to update the parameters using
simple natural parameter updates. These variational E-M updates are run once per timestep, thus
implementing a fast, streaming form of coordinate-ascent variational inference [31, 32]. The simple,
gradient-free form of these updates inherits from the exponential-family form of all the mixture
models used in AXIOM.
2.1
Growing and pruning the model
Fast structure learning.
In the spirit of fast structure learning [23], AXIOM dynamically expands
all four mixture modules (sMM, iMM, tMM, rMM) using an online growing heuristic: process each
new datapoint sequentially, decide whether it is best explained by an existing component or whether
a new component should be created, and then update the selected component’s parameters. We fix a
maximum number of components Cmax for each mixture model and let Ct−1 ≤Cmax be the number
currently in use. For each component c we store its variational parameters Θc, where for a particular
model this might be a set of Normal Inverse Wishart parameters, e.g. Θc,iMM = {mc, κc, Uc, nc}.
Upon observing a new input yt, we compute for each component c = 1, . . . , Ct−1 the variational
posterior–predictive log–density ℓt,c
=
Eq(Θc)

log p(yt | Θc)

. The truncated stick–breaking
prior π ∼Dir(1, . . . , 1, α) then defines a “new–component” threshold τt = log p0(yt) + log α
where p0 is the prior predictive density under an empty component.We select the component with
highest score, c∗= arg maxc≤Ct−1 ℓt,c and hard-assign yt to c∗if ℓt,c∗≥τt; otherwise—provided
Ct−1 < Cmax—we instantiate a new component and assign yt to it. Finally, given the hard assignment
zt, we update the chosen component’s parameters via a variational M-step (coordinate ascent).The
last weight in the Dirichlet absorbs any remaining mass, so PCmax
c=1 πc = 1.) This algorithm is a
deterministic, maximum a posteriori version of the CRP assignment rule (see Equation (8) of [27]).
The expansion threshold τt plays the role of the Dirichlet Process concentration α. When α is
small the model prefers explaining data with existing slots; larger α makes growth more likely. The
procedure is identical for the sMM, iMM, tMM and rMM—only the form of p(· | Θc) and the
model-specific caps on components Cmax and expansion thresholds τt differ.
Bayesian Model Reduction (BMR).
Every ∆TBMR =500 frames we sample up to npair =2000 used
rMM components, score their mutual expected log-likelihoods with respect to data generated from
the model through ancestral sampling, and greedily test merge candidates. A merge is accepted if
it decreases the expected free energy of the multinomial distributions over reward and next tMM
switch, conditioned on the sampled data for the remaining variables; otherwise it is rolled back. BMR
enables AXIOM to generalize dynamics from single events, for example learning that negative reward
is obtained when a ball hits the bottom of the screen, by merging multiple single event clusters (see
Section 3, Figure 4a).
6


=== PAGE 7 ===
Table 1: Cumulative reward over 10k steps for Gameworld 10k environments. Cumulative
reward is reported as mean ± std over 10 model seeds. Italic means AXIOM is better than BBF and
Dreamer, bold is overall best.
Game
AXIOM
BBF
DreamerV3
AXIOM (fixed dist.)
AXIOM (no BMR)
AXIOM (no IG)
Aviate
−90 ± 19
−90 ± 05
−114 ± 20
−76 ± 13
−87 ± 12
−71 ± 16
Bounce
27 ± 13
−1 ± 15
14 ± 16
34 ± 12
8 ± 03
↓
8 ± 19
Cross
−68 ± 36
−48 ± 07
−27 ± 08
−18 ± 21
↑
−34 ± 25
−7 ± 03
Drive
−49 ± 04
−37 ± 06
−45 ± 06
−22 ± 04
↑
−67 ± 03
↓
−32 ± 02
↑
Explode
180 ± 30
101 ± 13
35 ± 59
234 ± 16
↑
165 ± 14
190 ± 16
Fruits
182 ± 21
86 ± 15
60 ± 07
209 ± 19
141 ± 19
↓
200 ± 20
Gold
190 ± 18
−26 ± 12
−21 ± 10
189 ± 16
45 ± 15
↓
207 ± 17
Hunt
206 ± 20
4 ± 12
6 ± 09
231 ± 28
48 ± 13
↓
216 ± 11
Impact
189 ± 45
122 ± 20
168 ± 83
192 ± 09
197 ± 21
181 ± 72
Jump
−55 ± 09
−96 ± 17
−55 ± 17
−38 ± 25
−45 ± 05
↑
−43 ± 26
2.2
Planning
AXIOM uses active inference for planning [33]; it rolls out future trajectories conditioned on different
policies (sequences of actions) and then does inference about policies using the expected free energy,
where the chosen policy π∗is that which minimizes the expected free energy:
π∗= arg min
π
H
X
τ=0
−
 Eq(Oτ |π)[log p(rτ|Oτ, π)
|
{z
}
Utility
−DKL(q(αrmm|Oτ, π) ∥q(αrmm))
|
{z
}
Information gain (IG)
]

(10)
The expected per-timestep utility Eq(Oτ |π)[log p(rτ|Oτ, π)] is evaluated using the learned model and
slot latents at the time of planning, and accumulated over timesteps into the planning horizon. The
expected information gain (second term on RHS of Equation (10)) is computed using the posterior
Dirichlet counts of the rMM and scores how much information about rMM switch states would be
gained by taking the policy under consideration. More details on planning are given in Appendix A.11.
3
Results
To evaluate AXIOM, we compare its performance on Gameworld against two state-of-the-art baselines
on sample-efficient, pixel-based deep reinforcement learning: BBF and DreamerV3.
Benchmark.
The Gameworld environments are designed to be solvable by human learners within
minutes, ensuring that learning does not hinge on brittle exploration or complex credit assignment.
The suite includes 10 diverse games generated with the aid of a large language model, drawing
0
10000
-0.020
0.000
Average Reward (1K)
Aviate
0
10000
-0.020
0.000
Bounce
0
10000
-0.020
0.000
Cross
0
10000
-0.006
0.000
Drive
0
10000
0.000
0.030
Explode
0
10000
Step
0.000
0.020
Average Reward (1K)
Fruits
0
10000
Step
0.000
0.025
Gold
0
10000
Step
0.000
0.025
Hunt
0
10000
Step
0.000
0.050
Impact
0
10000
Step
-0.015
0.000
Jump
AXIOM
AXIOM (fixed distance)
Dreamer V3
BBF
Figure 3: Online learning performance. Moving average (1k steps) reward per step during training
for AXIOM, BBF and DreamerV3 on Gameworld 10k environments. Mean and standard deviation
over 10 parameter seeds per model and environment.
7


=== PAGE 8 ===
inspiration from ALE and classic video games, while maintaining a lightweight and structured design.
The Gameworld environments are available at https://github.com/VersesTech/gameworld. Figure 2
illustrates the variety and visual simplicity of the included games. To evaluate robustness, Gameworld
10k supports controlled interventions such as changes in object color or shape, testing an agent’s
ability to generalize across superficial domain shifts.
Baselines.
BBF [34] builds on SR-SPR [35] and represents one of the most sample-efficient model-
free approaches. We adapt its preprocessing for the Gameworld 10k suite by replacing frame-
skip with max-pooling over two consecutive frames; all other published hyperparameters remain
unchanged. Second, DreamerV3 [36] is a world-model-based agent with strong performance on
games and control tasks with only pixel inputs; we use the published settings but set the train
ratio to 1024 at batch size 16 (effective training ratio of 64:1). We chose these baselines because
they represent state of the art in sample-efficient learning from raw pixels. Note that for BBF and
DreamerV3, we rescale the frames to 84×84 and 96×96 pixels respectively (following the published
implementations), whereas AXIOM operates on full 210×160 frames of Gameworld.
Reward.
Figure 3 shows the 1000-step moving average of per-step reward from steps 0 to 10000 on
the Gameworld 10k suite (mean ± 1 standard deviation over 10 seeds). Table 1 shows the cumulative
reward attained at the end of the 10k interaction steps for AXIOM, BBF and DreamerV3. AXIOM
attains higher, or on par, average cumulative reward than BBF and DreamerV3 in every Gameworld
environment. Notably, AXIOM not only achieves higher peak scores on several games, but also
converges much faster, often reaching most of its final reward within the first 5k steps, whereas BBF
and DreamerV3 need nearly the full 10k. For those games where BBF and Dreamer seemed to show
no-better-than-random performance at 10k, we confirmed that their performance does eventually
improve, ruling out that the games themselves are intrinsically too difficult for these architectures
(see Appendix E.1). Taken together, this demonstrates that AXIOM’s object-centric world model,
in tandem with its fast, online structure learning and inference algorithms, can reduce the number
of interactions required to achieve high performance in pixel-based control. Fixing the interaction
distance yields higher cumulative reward as the agent doesn’t need to spend actions learning it, but
doing so requires tuning the interaction distance for each game. This illustrates how having extra
knowledge about the domain at hand can be incorporated into a Bayesian model like AXIOM to
further improve sample efficiency. Including the information gain term from Equation (10) allows
the agent to obtain reward faster in some games (e.g., Bounce), but actually results in a slower
increase of the average reward for others (e.g., Gold), as encourages visitation of information-rich
but negatively-rewarding states. BMR is crucial for games that need spatial generalization (like
Gold and Hunt), but actually hurts performance on Cross, as merging clusters early on discounts the
information gain term and discourages exploration. See Appendix E.2 for a more detailed discussion.
Computational costs.
Table 2 compares model sizes and per-step training timing (model update and
planning) measured on a single A100 GPU. While AXIOM incurs planning overhead due to the use
of many model-based rollouts, its model update is substantially more efficient than BBF, yielding
favorable trade-offs in wall-clock time per sample. The expanding object-centric model of AXIOM
converges to a sufficient complexity given the environment, in contrast to the fixed (and much larger)
model sizes of BBF and DreamerV3.
Interpretability.
Unlike conventional deep RL methods, AXIOM has a structured, object-centric
model whose latent variables and parameters can be directly interpreted in human-readable terms (e.g.,
shape, color, position). AXIOM’s transition mixture model also decomposes complex trajectories into
simpler linear sub-sequences. Figure 4a shows imagined trajectories and reward-conditioned clusters
Table 2: Training time per environment step on Gameworld 10k. Parameter count for AXIOM
varies as the model finds a sufficient complexity for each environment. Planning time for AXIOM
shows the range for 64 to 512 planning rollouts.
Model
Parameters (M)
Model update (ms/step)
Planning (ms/step)
BBF
6.47
135 ± 36
N/A
DreamerV3
420
221 ± 37
823 ± 93
AXIOM
0.3 - 1.6
18 ± 3
252 - 534
8


=== PAGE 9 ===
Image Data
Imagined Trajectory
Reward Clusters
(a)
0
5000
10000
Step
0
2500
# Components
BMR
No BMR
(b)
0
5000
10000
Step
0.00
2.00
Median (1k)
E[info gain]
E[utility]
(c)
0
5000
10000
Step
-0.04
0.00
Average Reward (1K)
None
Shape
Color
Color (remap)
(d)
Figure 4: Tracking AXIOM’s Behavior. (a) Example frame from Impact at time t (left); imagined
trajectory in latent space conditioned on the observation at time t and 32 timesteps into the future,
conditioned on an action sequence with high predicted reward (middle); and rMM clusters shown in 2-
D space and colored by expected reward (green positive reward, red negative reward aka punishment)
(right). (b) Expanding rMM components are pruned over training using Bayesian Model Reduction
(BMR) in Explode. (c) Information gain decreases while expected utility increases during training,
showing an exploration-exploitation trade-off in Explode. (d) Performance following perturbation at
5k steps shows robustness to changes in game mechanics in Explode.
of the rMM for the Impact game. The imagined trajectories in latent space (middle panel of Figure 4a)
are directly readable in terms of the colors and positions of the corresponding object. Because
the recurrent mixture model (rMM) conditions switch states on various game- and object-relevant
features, we can condition these switch variables on different game features and visualize them to
show the rMM’s learned associations (e.g., between reward and space). The right-most panel of
Figure 4a show the rMM clusters associated with reward (green) and punishment (red) plotted in
space. The distribution of these clusters explains AXIOM’s beliefs about where in space it expects
to encounter rewards, e.g., expecting a punishment when the player misses the ball (red cluster at
bottom of the right panel of Figure 4a).
Figure 4b shows the sharp decline in active rMM components during training. By actively merging
clusters to minimize the expected free energy associated with the reduced model, Bayesian model
reduction (BMR) improves computational efficiency while maintaining or improving performance
(see Table 1). The resulting merged components enable interpolation beyond the training data,
enhancing generalization. This automatic simplification reveals the minimal set of dynamics necessary
for optimal performance, making AXIOM’s decision process transparent and robust. Figure 4c
demonstrates that, as training progresses, per-step information gain decreases while expected utility
rises, reflecting a shift from exploration to exploitation as the world model becomes reliable.
Perturbation Robustness.
Finally, we test AXIOM under systematic perturbations of game mechanics.
Here, we perform a perturbation to the color or shape of each object at step 5000. Figure 4d shows that
AXIOM is resilient to shape perturbations, as it still correctly infers the object type with the iMM. In
response to a color perturbation, AXIOM adds new identity types and needs to re-learn their dynamics,
resulting in a slight drop in performance and subsequent recovery. Due to the interpretable structure
of AXIOM’s world model, we can prime it with knowledge about possible color perturbations, and
then only use the shape information in the iMM inference step, before remapping the perturbed slots
based on shape and rescue performance. For more details, see Appendix E.3.
4
Conclusion
In this work, we introduced AXIOM, a novel and fully Bayesian object-centric agent that learns how
to play simple games from raw pixels with improved sample efficiency compared to both model-
based and model-free deep RL baselines. Importantly, it does so without relying on neural networks,
gradient-based optimization, or replay buffers. By employing mixture models that automatically
expand to accommodate environmental complexity, our method demonstrates strong performance
within a strict 10, 000-step interaction budget on the Gameworld 10k benchmark. Furthermore,
AXIOM builds interpretable world models with an order of magnitude fewer parameters than standard
models while maintaining competitive performance. To this end, our results suggest that Bayesian
methods with structured priors about objects and their interactions have the potential to bridge the
gap between the expressiveness of deep RL techniques and the data-efficiency of Bayesian methods
with explicit models, suggesting a valuable direction for research.
9


=== PAGE 10 ===
Limitations and future work.
Our work is limited by the fact that the core priors are themselves
engineered rather than discovered autonomously. Future work will focus on developing methods to
automatically infer such core priors from data, which should allow our approach to be applied to
more complex domains like Atari or Minecraft [36], where the underlying generative processes are
less transparent but still governed by similar causal principles. We believe this direction represents
a crucial step toward building adaptive agents that can rapidly construct structural models of novel
environments without explicit engineering of domain-specific knowledge.
Acknowledgements
. We would like to thank Jeff Beck, Alex Kiefer, Lancelot Da Costa, and
members of the VERSES Machine Learning Foundations and Embodied Intelligence Labs for useful
discussions related to the AXIOM architecture.
References
[1] Y. Li, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07274, 2017.
[2] E. S. Spelke and K. D. Kinzler, “Core knowledge,” Developmental science, vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 89–96, 2007.
[3] B. M. Lake, T. D. Ullman, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. J. Gershman, “Building machines that learn
and think like people,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 40, p. e253, 2017.
[4] B. M. Lake, R. Salakhutdinov, and J. B. Tenenbaum, “Human-level concept learning through
probabilistic program induction,” Science, vol. 350, no. 6266, pp. 1332–1338, 2015.
[5] E. Téglás, E. Vul, V. Girotto, M. Gonzalez, J. B. Tenenbaum, and L. L. Bonatti, “Pure reasoning
in 12-month-old infants as probabilistic inference,” science, vol. 332, no. 6033, pp. 1054–1059,
2011.
[6] E. S. Spelke, R. Kestenbaum, D. J. Simons, and D. Wein, “Spatiotemporal continuity, smooth-
ness of motion and object identity in infancy,” British journal of developmental psychology,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 113–142, 1995.
[7] E. S. Spelke, “Principles of object perception,” Cognitive science, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 29–56,
1990.
[8] A. M. Leslie and S. Keeble, “Do six-month-old infants perceive causality?,” Cognition, vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 265–288, 1987.
[9] T. Wiedemer, J. Brady, A. Panfilov, A. Juhos, M. Bethge, and W. Brendel, “Provable composi-
tional generalization for object-centric learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05327, 2023.
[10] F. Kapl, A. M. K. Mamaghan, M. Horn, C. Marr, S. Bauer, and A. Dittadi, “Object-centric
representations generalize better compositionally with less compute,” in ICLR 2025 Workshop
on World Models: Understanding, Modelling and Scaling, 2025.
[11] W. Agnew and P. Domingos, “Unsupervised object-level deep reinforcement learning,” in
NeurIPS workshop on deep RL, 2018.
[12] T. Kipf, E. Fetaya, K.-C. Wang, M. Welling, and R. Zemel, “Neural relational inference for
interacting systems,” in International conference on machine learning, pp. 2688–2697, Pmlr,
2018.
[13] A. Lei, B. Schölkopf, and I. Posner, “Spartan: A sparse transformer learning local causation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.06890, 2024.
[14] W. Zhang, A. Jelley, T. McInroe, and A. Storkey, “Objects matter: object-centric world
models improve reinforcement learning in visually complex environments,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.16443, 2025.
[15] T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K. J. Friston, Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, brain,
and behavior. MIT Press, 2022.
10


